---
bibliography: biblioteca.bib
csl: chicago-fullnote-bibliography-with-ibid.csl
reference-section-title: Referencias
subtitle: La dimensión comunitaria
title: Comunidad
---

<header class="chapter-headers"> <h1>{{ page.title }}</h1>
<h2>{{ page.subtitle }}</h2> </header>

Fragilidad, precariedad vs. trabajo sostenido y significativo^[Stephen Papson, "Scholars, Intellectuals, and Bricoleurs," *Arts and Humanities in Higher Education* 13, no. 4 (October 2014): 377--94, <https://doi.org/10.1177/1474022213487951>.]

ACADÉMICO, INTELECTUAL, BRICOLER Y aquí añadiríamos también al
activista.^[John Dewey, *Art as Experience*, \[Nachdr.\]; 1. Perigee print 1980, A Perigee Book (New York, NY: Berkley, 1995).]

Siguiendo esta idea del bricolér, podríamos decir que una de las
características más particulares de las humanidades digitales,
entendidas en toda su amplitud, es que normalmente implican el trabajo
conjunto de diferentes personas con variadas habilidades, conocimientos,
intereses y sensibilidades: humanistas, científicas, técnicas,
activistas, etc. En este sentido, los proyectos enmarcados en las
humanidades digitales son afines a encontrar terrenos y propósitos
comunes en medio de la diferencia.

En el contexto académico se hablaría de la condición transdisicplinaria
de las humanidades digitales. Pero, como ya problematizamos la noción de
disciplina en el capítulo sobre la tradición humanística, y como
queremos incluir otro tipo de roles por fuera de la academia, podemos
decir que las humanidades digitales opera en ciertas comunidades
particulares. Comunidad como forma de organización y resolución de
propósitos.

"The essential meaning of community might seem obvious enough. It refers
to those things which people have in common, which bind them together,
and give them a sense of belonging with one another."^[Graham Day, *Community and Everyday Life* (London ; New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2006), 1.] Graham Day p.1
"The idea of community captures these elements of inclusion and
exclusion, pointing towards those who belong together, and those who are
held apart" p.2 DISTINTAS VISIONES SOCIOLÓGICAS DE QUE ES Y QUE IMPORTA
EN UNA COMUNIDAD Durkheim "makes connections between evolving forms of
social solidarity and the changing 'moral density' of society, as
measured by patterns of population concen- tration, migration and
geographical mobility. These are seen as exerting a pressure on the
social division of labour, which in turn conditions the kinds of
communal relations that are likely to develop. Thus the changing nature
of community is influenced, or even determined, by a wide range of
material and institutional forces" p.3

"Tonnies in setting out a specific contrast between 'community'
(Gemeinschaft) and 'association' (Gesellschaft). Unlike Weber, who saw
these as intermingled and continuous aspects of social relations,
Tonnies is often regarded as setting the precedent for treating them as
opposing, mutually exclusive, sides of a dichotomy. Certainly they
represent different principles of social organization. For Tonnies,
Gemeinschaft involves 'a lasting and genuine form of living together'
which is oriented towards the achievement of ends, through 'coordinated
action for a common good'. Gesellschaft implies instead an orientation
to means, calculated action on the part of individuals who engage in
'artificial' relations for what they can get from one another."p.5 Clay
Madden and Potts también hablan de la slippiness del término comunidad
NO BUSCO LA DICOTOMIA ENTRE Tonnies Emotion (solidarity, empathy,
belonging -community) and convenience (interested, pramatic, instrumetal
-association) Moral dimension Community as a relationship of the past
(blood, race, geography, etc.) Is community inherently a good thing?
"Consequently, community has become one of the most abused terms in the
rhetoric of politics and policy making, employed promiscuously to
harness the positive feelings and support that accompany motives of
altruism and solidarity." p.14 Bauman: community as exclusion
disorganization, fragmentation, and individiualization

ME INTERESA MAS: Grupos de personas que se unen para lograr propósitos
comunes, e idealmente construir relaciones duraderas que faciliten esos
propósitos. Entonces cabe resaltar que la visión de comunidad que me
interesa analizar aquí no es una visión hacia el pasado (la recuperación
de alguna identidad común) sino hacia el futuro (en donde el pasado
puede servir para construir ese futuro). Parafraseando a Williams 1975
"community becomes a political project, a function of the mobilization
of collective powers, and therefore is compatible with the conscious
pursuit and real- ization of shared values and goals"Graham Day p.20
"his own position is that community can be conceived of as an active
process through which individuals and groups strive to realize their
potential" p.20 Un sentido infraestructural: La Relaciones duraderas o
su condición fragmentaria Su agencia: Capacidad para Lograr propósitos
comunes Y su sostenimiento: Motivaciones y recursos que cohesionan a la
comunidad Su escala: la relación global-local / hegemonías y diásporas
"From the point of view of community, three main aspects of these
changes would appear to be particularly relevant: the dissolution of
place; vastly increased mobility; and the destabilization of
identities." graham Day 182

Creación de grupos para lograr propósitos comunes que conectan a las
humanidades con las tecnologías digitales.

Las prácticas de las humanidades digitales se desenvuelven dentro de
distintas comunidades que pueden ser formales o informales, una
colaboración entre las dos, o un híbrido. El tipo de comunidad en buena
medida define los intereses, límites y posibilidades del tipo de
actividades y proyectos que pueden realizar.

Institución formal: conservación, apreciación, educación / defensa del
humanismo como tradición Presupuestos estatales y privados

-   universidad -> Disciplinamiento y especialización
-   museo
-   biblioteca - archivo

Disciplinamiento, varias entrevistadas se refieren a las separaciones
institucionales, pero también físicas, de las facultades en las
universidades.

Informal: - redes - grupos de la sociedad civil - hacker spaces,
laboratorios

En las humanidades digitales, al menos, la informalidad sostiene y
fundamenta la formalidad

SUSTENIBILIDAD, EL PROBLEMA DEL VOLUNTARISMO (modelo organizacional)
(Isabel Galina refelxiona sobre esto) ES UNA GIFT ECONOMY (modelo de
economia digital, ligado a las donaciones)? EL TRABAJO GRATUITO SE
CONVIERTE EN UNA SUPOSICIÓN POR DEFECTO PROYECTOS DE LARGA ESCALA
AUTONOMÍA FAcilitamiento por medio de redes en internet: Jenkins
participatory Culture

Seva: india, servicio Borantia kasudo: japan voluntary service Minga:
quechua, voluntary communitary labor Juntanza:

Se relacionan con un problema infraestructural

También el problema de qué se acepta y qué no, y qué temas de estudio
son relevantes o qué teorías valen la pena, tienen relación con la
postura de la epistemología que se va a tomar pero también con las
trayectorias institucionales y personales de las personas que
participan.

Entre más conexiones, más resultados Procesos colaborativos, múltiples,
interconectados, que se comunican entre sí en toda latinoamérica
(MOSTRAR MAPA DE MENCIONES DE TWITTER?)

"The key element which distinguishes learning communities as a pedagogic
model (and relates them to the sister concept of 'communities of
practice') is the idea that learning isn't the acquisition of know-
ledge but is about participation in a social process." Stuart Billingham
en CLay, MAdden and Potts Towards Understanding Community 2007 p.36

Community of practice como duradera, efectiva, informal y más abierta a
la representación de comunidades marginadas. Stuart Billingham en Clay
etal

"Communities of practice do not follow a particular model: some are
formal and may have names; others are very informal and fluid. The key
point is that members of the community come together because of what
they have learned/are learning through their mutual engagement with each
other and because of what they have done/are doing together." Stuart
Billingham en Clay etal p. 39

Lave and Wenger (1991) first explored the idea of 'communities of
practice' in the context of developing a theory that genuine learning is
always 'situated'. According to Lave and Wenger, knowledge is always
produced within a context. By 1999, Wenger summarised the idea of
'communities of practice' as follows:

Being alive as human beings means we are constantly engaged in the
pursuit of enterprises of all kinds, from ensuring our physical survival
to seeking the most lofty pleasures. As we define these enterprises and
engage in their pursuit together, we interact with each other and with
the world and we tune our relations with each other and with the world
accordingly. In other words we learn. Over time, this collective
learning results in practices that reflect both the pursuit of our
enterprises and the attendant social relations. These relations are thus
the property of a kind of community created over time by the sustained
pursuit of a shared enterprise. It makes sense, therefore, to call these
kinds of communities, communities of practice (Wenger 1999: 45).

"However, what defines a 'community of practice' is not simply that
members share a skill or knowledge-set related to a task. Crucially,
they are defined by the social relationships that exist and/or develop
over time between the members. This is why the concept of 'community'
struck Lave and Wenger as appropriate to describe this phenomenon. This
is a key point. The concept of community, as used here, sees learning as
being about participation rather than internalisation."Stuart Billingham
p.40

Creating Community Within Individual Courses Arthur W. Chickering 2000
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION: Esto lo usa para hablar de cursos
pero aplica para comunidadas en general

Entrenamiento: Hacer a los individuos más parecidos entre sí: adquirir
conceptos, percepciones, formas de conocer, propósitos y valores VS.
Educación: Clarificar valores y metas propias. Complejizar conceptos,
competencias y perspectivas

Propóstisos instrumentales Fines particulares VS. desarrollistas:
Adquirir habilidades

Diferenciación Ver las partes VS. Integración Configurar un todo

"Normative motives are based on feelings of altruism, such as the desire
to help others or the organization without regard for any personal
benefits to be gained. Normative incentives take the form of ritualistic
symbols such as informing the person that the task they are to perform
is for a good cause. Rational motives are based on the pursuit of
self-interest, such as career advancement. Rational incentives are
material rewards, such as skills acquired in a voluntary position that
can help career advance- ment. Affiliative motives reflect the desire to
identify with a group and form affective bonds with others.
Affiliativeincentives include social activities and formal ceremonies."
Puffer and Meindl The congruence of motives and incentives in Note a
voluntary organization 1992

Incongruence between motives and incentives

"The intent is to sustain the learning and build the capacity for future
collective learning rather than simply seek a solution to a problem.
Although a desire to solve problems certainly moti- vates a group to
engage in learning, this case shows how a community group voluntarily
engages in a long-term process of reflecting on commu- nity issues from
historical, cultural, and social perspectives." p.38 Creating Local
Knowledge Through Learning in Community: A Case Study David S. Stein NEW
DIRECTIONS FOR ADULT AND CONTINUING EDUCATION, no. 95, Fall 2002


Richard Ryan y Edward Deci
